### IEEE. What Is It ?:

Structure wise, a binary word is split into three components; a sign bit s,  k exponent bits and an n bit fraction field. It gets slightly more complicated with the introduction of more terms in the following formula needed for the actual calculation of the floating point decimal:

V = (-1)<sup>s</sup> * M * (2<sup>E</sup>)

But what is M and E? They are derived from f and e in different ways depending on the context:

M is the  ranges from 0 to 1 - e  or 1 and 2 - e
and
E is the exponent, which weighs it by powers of 2

The logic applied here is to compute basic fractional binary biners for the exp and frac fields, and apply some stupid transformation on them depending on the three situations deemed by Kahan and his goons at the IEEE.

### Three Situations:

I. Normalized: The high lords of the IEEE have determined that when the exponent is neither all 0's or all 1's, E ranges in value from -126 to 127 for single precision; E = e - Bias (2<sup>k-1</sup> - 1) and  M is 1 + f.  The lowest value is never 0 and the maximum value is astronomical for single and double precision formats.

II. Denormalized: Occurs when the exponent is all zero. In that case, E is 1 - Bias and M = f. These represent values that are very close to 0 but not quite.

III. Special: All 0's is zero, and when the exponent is all 1's, it's infinity.

I believe the benefit of all of this is to allow a somewhat uniform distribution of numbers that carries over to whole integers up to very high values while allowing for the approximation fractional decimal numbers (huge guess here). The system is also set up such that in unsigned form, it appears that increasing values is concurrent with increasing floating point values as well, allowing for integer sorting routines to be applied directly unto floating numbers (100% fact). 

Finally, there are other bullshit terms like mantissa that should be avoided like the plague out of respect for human decency.

### Rounding:

Round-to-even (default): Closest mark. Halfway values are roudned such that the result has an even number in the least significant digit. The logic of which means that statistically, a set of points will have an average that is neither over or under estimated than if we had always rounded up or down.

Round-to-zero (float to int): Always towards zero which only becomes apparent when one considers the sign.

### Registers and Such:

There are 16 ymm or xmm registers holding 32/16 bytes (256/128 bits). Beyond that should be looked up on a case-by-case basis. The main gist of all of this is that even though floating point numbers are ugly and cumbersome, they can be used to exploit parallelism by performing the same opereation on a number of data points in parallel represented as packed data (SIMD). Details forthcoming in chapter 5.



